Module
No.
Topics Ref. Hrs.
1 Introduction
Reviewing basic concepts of a relational database, Basic SQL
2,5 1
2 Advanced SQL
Complex Retrieval Queries using Group By, Recursive Queries, nested
Queries ; Specifying Constraints as Assertions; Event Condition Action
(ECA) model (Triggers) in SQL;
Creating and working with Views in SQL; Database Programming:
Embedded SQL, Dynamic SQL and SQLJ, Database Programming with
Function Calls: JDBC; Stored Procedures in SQL, Embedded SQL,
Dynamic SQL.
1,2 6
3 Advanced Transaction Processing & Recovery
Review of ACID properties and Serializability ; Multiversion Concurrency
Control Techniques; Granularity of Data Items and Multiple Granularity
Locking ; Advanced Database Recovery techniques like Write Ahead
Logging (WAL), ARIES, Checkpoints.
1,2 6
4 Data Security
Introduction to Database Security Issues; Discretionary Access Control
Based on Granting and Revoking Privileges; Mandatory
Access Control and Role-Based Access Control for Multilevel Security;
1,2,6 4
Sardar Patel Institute of Technology
Bhavan‟s Campus, Munshi Nagar, Andheri (West), Mumbai-400058-India
(Autonomous Institute Affiliated to University of Mumbai)
15
SQL Injection; Introduction to Statistical Database Security Introduction to
Flow Control
5 Storage and Indexing
Operation on Files; hashing Techniques; Types of Single-Level Ordered
Indexes; Multilevel Indexes; Dynamic Multilevel Indexes Using B-Trees
and B+-Trees; Indexes on Multiple Keys.
1,2 4
6 Distributed Databases
Types of Distributed Database Systems; Distributed Database
Architectures; Data Fragmentation, Replication and Allocation Techniques
for Distributed Database Design; Query Processing
and Optimization in Distributed Databases; Overview of Transaction
Management in Distributed Databases; Overview of Concurrency Control
and Recovery in Distributed Databases.
1,8 6
7 Object Based Databases
Overview of Object Database. Concepts; Object-Relational Features;
Object Database Extensions to SQL; The Object
Definition Language ODL; Object Database Conceptual Design; The
Object Query. Language OQL.
1,2 5
8 Introduction to Data warehousing
The Need for Data Warehousing; Increasing Demand for Strategic
Information; Inability of Past Decision Support System; Operational Vs
Decisional Support System; 1.3 Data Warehouse Defined; Benefits of Data
Warehousing ;
Features of a Data Warehouse; The Information Flow Mechanism; Role of
Metadata; Classification of Metadata; Data Warehouse Architecture;
Different Types of Architecture; Data Warehouse and Data Marts; Data
Warehousing Design Strategies.
3,4,7 2
9 Dimensional Modeling
Data Warehouse Modeling Vs Operational Database Modeling;
Dimensional Model Vs ER Model; Features of a Good Dimensional
Model; The Star Schema; How Does a Query Execute? The Snowflake
Schema; Fact Tables and Dimension Tables. The Fact less Fact Table;
Updates To Dimension Tables: Slowly Changing
Dimensions, Type 1 Changes, Type 2 Changes, Type 3 Changes, Large
Dimension Tables, Rapidly Changing or Large Slowly Changing
Dimensions, Junk Dimensions, Keys in the Data
Warehouse Schema, Primary Keys, Surrogate Keys & Foreign Keys;
Aggregate Tables; Fact Constellation Schema or Families of Star.
3,4,7 6
10 ETL Process
Challenges in ETL Functions; Data Extraction; Identification of Data
Sources; Extracting Data: Immediate Data Extraction, Deferred Data
Extraction; Data Transformation: Tasks Involved
in Data Transformation, Data Loading: Techniques of Data Loading,
Loading the Fact Tables and Dimension Tables Data Quality; Issues in
Data Cleansing.
3,4,7 4
Sardar Patel Institute of Technology
Bhavan‟s Campus, Munshi Nagar, Andheri (West), Mumbai-400058-India
(Autonomous Institute Affiliated to University of Mumbai)
16
11 Online Analytical Processing (OLAP)
Need for Online Analytical Processing; OLTP vs OLAP; OLAP and
Multidimensional Analysis; Hypercubes; OLAP Operations in
Multidimensional Data 